WHANOS - BOOTSTRAP_
< SAY HELLO TO THE ALMIGHTY WHALE />
WHANOS - BOOTSTRAP
Well well well... here we are! The last bootstrap of the DevOps track! Do not be sad please :(

As you might have seen, the Whanos project is pretty complex, so what and how could we start taking on
this project? Well, let us see together!




   If you have not read the project's subject, please do it first.


This bootstrap is less strict in terms of what to produce, as the project itself will leave you quite a deal of
freedom.




Step 1 - Thinking about infrastructure
During the DevOps track, you have seen 5 different technologies: Docker, GitHub Actions, Jenkins, Ansible,
and Kubernetes.

And you will now have to use (most of) them together.

You might have guessed that these different technologies will need to be correctly organized in order to
work together. And you would be right! This is where important architecture decisions must be made.

For each technology, there are several points about which attention must be given before starting the
project.

Next page are some points that you should think about.




                                                      1
Version used

Which version of the technology will you use?

If there exists a Long-Term Support (a.k.a. LTS) version and a more frequently updated version, why choos-
ing one instead of the other?

If not choosing a LTS or more frequently updated version, what are the strong points supporting your
choice?



Hosting

Where will the different parts of the project be hosted?

Will you use your own hosting solution? Or will they be hosted on the cloud? (Or maybe a mixture of the
two?)

If hosting on the cloud, which cloud provider or providers will you choose? And why?

Will the different parts be hosted on the same machine? If not, where will each part be hosted?




   It is obvious that the infrastructure you are going to set up cannot include your own computer as a
   part of it.
   There must be a single source of truth accessible by everyone in your group, and by the evaluator.




Ease of use

Thinking about the previous points is important. Ensuring that the infrastructure is easy to use and operate
is equally important. Think about what one would need to perform on the infrastructure, as well as how
one would need to proceed to do such actions.



Security

How are your infrastructure and different technologies going to be securely configured?

How will you ensure that only authorized access is possible? How will you manage secrets?




                                                     2
Step 2 - Documenting the infrastructure
Memory fails, and the human one more frequently than computers', so it is important to have an exhaustive
documentation about how your infrastructure is, well... structured.

In the repository of the project, create a docs directory which will contain the results of your thoughts on
the infrastructure.

They can be documented in the form of one or several Markdown files, images, or whatever you see fit.

Be sure to include, the what, the why, and the how of the different decisions.




Step 3 - Setting up the infrastructure
Now that you have a clear and documented idea of what your infrastructure will look like, it is time for you
to set it up!

Install the different technologies where needed, and ensure they are working properly (e.g.: try to run the
hello-world image for Docker).




   It is also the time where you have to start thinking, if you have not started before, about the ability
   to easily deploy, but especially redeploy your infrastructure.

   With Jenkins, for example, you can use the plug-ins you know and love: Configuration as Code and
   Job DSL.




                                                     3
Step 4 - Automate the deployment of the
infrastructure
Now, you should have an idea of which operations to perform in order to deploy your infrastructure.

Choose an appropriate technology (such as Ansible) to write configuration files with to ensure that your
infrastructure can be easily redeployed and updated.




That's all folks!
And that is the end of this final bootstrap.

I hope that you are not too sad. :(

You should now have an infrastructure ready to be operated in order to set up the almighty Whanos infras-
tructure.

So here it is, it is now time for you to start the final project of your DevOps track! Please have fun while
doing it, you will learn valuable knowledge, and you will have a very useful infrastructure at the end.

Good luck, and may Whanos guide you!




                                                     4
v3
